[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: But this is a real India and things are getting worse.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics,
[Unknown]: politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen. Today's episode is about the impending jobs crisis in India,
[Amit Varma]: or rather the ongoing jobs crisis. And my guest is my old friend, the brilliant Yaza Chal.
[Amit Varma]: I first met Yaza around 15 years ago when he was an early blogger like me and used to work as CEO
[Amit Varma]: of Praja, a Mumbai NGO that works with government to make it more accountable. He then went to the
[Amit Varma]: US, got an MBA at Yale, worked as a consultant at firms like McKinsey and IBM, and then decided to
[Amit Varma]: come back to India. He now works at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore and heads a project
[Amit Varma]: called 20 million jobs. The purpose of this project is to try and understand India's jobs crisis,
[Amit Varma]: to propose solutions and bring all of this into the public discourse. There'll be a book at the
[Amit Varma]: end of this, perhaps even films and so on. But that's down the line. As of now, Yaza and his
[Amit Varma]: team is collecting data and coming to terms with the enormity of the problem. I've been looking
[Amit Varma]: forward to this conversation. But before we begin a quick commercial break. Like me, are you someone
[Amit Varma]: who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging
[Amit Varma]: on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to Indian colors.com. Indian colors is a company
[Amit Varma]: that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India and adapts them
[Amit Varma]: into objects of everyday use. These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor
[Amit Varma]: like cushion covers and table runners and accessories like tote bags. This allows art lovers
[Amit Varma]: to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price. And artists get royalties on
[Amit Varma]: sales just like authors do. What's more, Indian colors now has an exciting range of new products,
[Amit Varma]: including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra. They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting.
[Amit Varma]: But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IBM 20. That's
[Amit Varma]: IBM for IBM podcast IBM 20 for a 20% discount at Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Yazad, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Amit. Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Yazad, I've actually done an episode in the past on the jobs crisis. I think it was with Vivek
[Amit Varma]: Kaul. But I get the sense that even I don't fully understand how bad things are. So so give us all a
[Amit Varma]: sense of what this jobs crisis is like. How bad is it?
[Guest]: Okay, it's enormous, is perhaps the best word to put it. According to labor ministry data,
[Guest]: we have 12 million people entering the workforce every year.
[Guest]: That's 1 million a month.
[Guest]: That's right. Additionally, we have approximately six and a half to 7 million jobs that are being
[Guest]: lost in agriculture every year.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So we have around about 18 to 19 million jobs that doesn't count other sectors and other job
[Guest]: losses. So rounding it off, we have around about 20 million jobs that need to be created every year
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: That's about 16 or 17 lakh people coming into the workforce every month.
[Guest]: That's right. That's right. So when we look at that, we'd also somebody would ask, but of course,
[Guest]: jobs are also being created. It's not that you know, we just have this gap.
[Guest]: Different surveys give us different figures. For example, between 2011 to 2015, we created around
[Guest]: about 7 million jobs total. Between 2013 and 16, we created between 1.5 to 1.4 million jobs.
[Guest]: That's one and a half to 4 lakh jobs in the entire year.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So other surveys show that we create 7 million jobs a year.
[Guest]: Even the most optimistic of those, which I don't believe talked about by Sujit Bhalla,
[Guest]: said that we created 12 million jobs in a year. None of those come close to the figure that we
[Guest]: really need to create the 20 million jobs that we're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: And frankly, Sujit Bhalla's 12 million figure is just nonsense. He's kind of I mean, I don't want
[Amit Varma]: to be harsh and focus on personalities, but he's renowned for getting everything wrong through his
[Amit Varma]: career. So let's not even.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, for example, I'll give you one example where those figures don't work out.
[Guest]: They take the employment, the EPA for data, the Employment Provident Fund Organization data,
[Guest]: and then they look at new Provident Fund accounts that have been open for workers aged 18 to 21
[Guest]: years. And they assume that 80% of workers in this age bracket are first time workers.
[Guest]: That assumption is not justified. So you arrive at a figure of 1.8 million new jobs in the sector
[Guest]: and this age group without having any sort of firm foundation for that by just making
[Guest]: a little bit of statistical, you know, jugaad, if one must say.
[Guest]: So but the most optimistic of it is even is around about 60% of what is required in the economy
[Guest]: today. That's the reason why when you have these things like the Railway Recruitment Board or the
[Guest]: UP police, which, you know, notified for like a few thousand jobs, and they got inside 62 jobs,
[Guest]: I'm sorry, the UP police gave an ad out for 62 jobs for a communications post, which required
[Guest]: a fifth standard education. They got more than 3000 PhDs applying for that same job.
[Guest]: My God. So we have this gap. And that is why you have people who are highly educated,
[Guest]: looking for the first possible or any possible chance or opportunity they have.
[Guest]: So in a sense, the situation is quite dire. And that, you know, that speaks to a number
[Amit Varma]: of things like that kind of a figure with 1000s and even lakhs of, you know, where you have more
[Amit Varma]: than 300 applicants for a single low level government job. And so many people are so
[Amit Varma]: well educated speaks to a number of things. One, it tells you that there's just a lack of jobs out
[Amit Varma]: there. Two, it tells you that there's a mismatch between education and employment that somehow that
[Amit Varma]: demand supply relationship that should exist between the two does not and obviously, we've
[Amit Varma]: both spoken about this many times in the past part of this is because markets aren't allowed
[Amit Varma]: to operate in either of those fields. And that causes a mismatch. And also, there is an
[Amit Varma]: interesting point that these people that there is this greater demand for public sector jobs,
[Amit Varma]: government jobs, because that just not only tells you that that kind of security is valued,
[Amit Varma]: but it also tells you the uncertainty and the insecurities that come with private sector jobs
[Amit Varma]: and private sector jobs across India aren't really the sort of jobs that elites like you and I might
[Amit Varma]: get where you get a salary and you have your perquisites and all and there's a contract and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. But they're pretty dire. Most of them are in the informal sector, which only exists
[Amit Varma]: because of bad regulation. But I'll come to all of these later. I'd like to explore all of these.
[Amit Varma]: But first, just sort of start with a basic point of misunderstanding that a lot of people have. Can
[Guest]: you define what a job is for me? So that's that's actually difficult to do. So whether it's paid
[Guest]: employment or self employment, there is no clear definition of a job. What we do have is we have
[Guest]: formal jobs and informal jobs in India. So a formal job has an explicit contract. Okay,
[Guest]: while an informal job has no such contract to it. And additionally, we have what we call the
[Guest]: organized sector and the unorganized sector. So the unorganized sector is basically unincorporated
[Guest]: private enterprises with 10 or less workers in them. Right. So these are the micro and the mini
[Guest]: kind of organizations. And between 80 to 90% of working age population people either work in this
[Guest]: unorganized sector. So a large percentage of these are self employed. And part of this unorganized
[Amit Varma]: sector might be formal or is all of it informal? Part of it could be formal, but very doubtful. So
[Guest]: most of it the formal sector is in the formal organized sector, right, is what we really focus
[Guest]: on. So when for example, there was a news item recently that we had tech firms were hiring. So
[Guest]: those would all be formal jobs in the organized sector. These are large companies like TCS and
[Guest]: Wipro and Infosys that were hiring. And a big hoo-ha was made about it. But the total number
[Guest]: of jobs if I remember right was around about 24,000. Right. So and there was there was supposed
[Guest]: to be big news that 24,000 jobs new jobs being created. So those would all be formal organized
[Guest]: sector jobs. But the vast majority of people who work in this country work in the informal and the
[Amit Varma]: unorganized sector. So I'll take a brief detour here. What is the informal or unorganized sector?
[Guest]: Why does it exist? It exists because most small organizations in the country haven't been able
[Guest]: to scale up for a variety of reasons. And also because in this because of labor laws, it makes
[Guest]: sense, you know, to kind of keep your organization small. So those are roughly the two reasons why
[Guest]: you'd have a large number of organized unorganized sector workers in the country.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I had a rant on this a couple of episodes ago, I think the demonetization episode
[Amit Varma]: with our mutual friend Shruti, where we were lamenting how, you know, the informal sector is
[Amit Varma]: often treated as if there is something morally wrong in being informal, you're evading taxes or
[Amit Varma]: whatever. And what people don't understand and what I want to just keep stressing is that the
[Amit Varma]: reason the informal sector exists is because it is forced to because government regulations are
[Amit Varma]: so draconian and so stringent that most of those companies would not be able to comply and would
[Amit Varma]: not be able to exist in the formal sector. And therefore, they are forced to exist in the informal
[Amit Varma]: sector. And that prevents them from scaling up to the kind of level that they otherwise would,
[Amit Varma]: which would be great for both the nation and the economy in this whole virtuous cycle positive
[Amit Varma]: some kind of way where they would generate far more employment, and so on. So we should not look
[Amit Varma]: at the informal sector as people who are somehow outside the law, but as people who are not
[Amit Varma]: allowed to function because of the draconian nature of the law.
[Guest]: That's true. Sometime back, we were talking to an exporter of textiles, garment manufacturer and
[Guest]: exporter, a quite large conglomerate. And they were telling me that they keep their factories
[Guest]: to round about two and a half thousand workers max, because of infrastructure reasons as well.
[Guest]: They want to make sure the workers you know, are able to come to the factory easily enough,
[Guest]: while in villages and other areas, it's if it's more than an hour's journey,
[Guest]: people simply won't come to work. And that infrastructure doesn't exist
[Guest]: in rural areas to help people simply commute to work.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And the other interesting thing, and this will lead me to my next question. And the other
[Amit Varma]: interesting thing here is that you mentioned how there was so much hoo-ha and hype about the 24,000
[Amit Varma]: new jobs, which were all created in the formal sector, and again, for relative elites. And what
[Amit Varma]: people don't understand often is that much of the data is either coming from the much of the data
[Amit Varma]: on jobs is either coming from the formal sector, or it's extrapolations from data that comes from
[Amit Varma]: the formal sector. The informal sector is very hard to get data that, you know, labor contractors
[Amit Varma]: kitne hain, pakore wala kitna hain and so on. Which is why when you look at something like
[Amit Varma]: demonetization, for example, it's hard to estimate the damage it did, because most of the damage
[Amit Varma]: would have happened in the informal sector, which runs mainly on cash. And, of course, 86% of the
[Amit Varma]: cash supply was cut off. And you have no idea of how many companies shut down in the margins,
[Amit Varma]: how many livelihoods were destroyed, because none of that is reflected in the data is that
[Amit Varma]: sort of accurate. And then the next broader question, which I'd like you to sort of expound
[Amit Varma]: on is, what are the problems you face when you're doing a sort of project like this,
[Amit Varma]: where you're trying to understand the jobs crisis with data?
[Guest]: So there's a lot of problems with data. I mean, the Prime Minister himself has talked about
[Guest]: and confessed that, you know, regarding data, there's hardly any numbers available in employment
[Guest]: statistics, he tried to get out of giving figures for this. But he's right in the sense that we
[Guest]: have data from different sources. We have Labor Ministry data, we have the NSSO data,
[Guest]: the National Sample Survey Organization data, we have data from sources like the Employees
[Guest]: Provident Fund, which we shouldn't really be using for job markets data. But there is no
[Guest]: central statistical kind of data repository. And apart from that, there is no consistent
[Guest]: collection of data as well. So very often, one has to rely on private sector data, data from sources
[Guest]: like the CMI, the Center for Monitoring the Indian Economy, and different sources of data then give
[Guest]: different pictures. And one is confused at times at which source to take what kind of assumptions
[Guest]: to make, how does one reconcile the data from different sources, it's something that we are
[Guest]: still grappling with right now, looking at all these figures and trying to make sense of them
[Guest]: is a huge part of the problem as well. And that's one reason why we haven't been able to estimate
[Guest]: for example, how many jobs the economy is creating. So let's say you have certain data sets
[Amit Varma]: at your disposal, and you make of them what you do. But beyond that, what are the sort of broad
[Amit Varma]: metrics that you draw upon to kind of figure out how bad the problem is, is the problem getting
[Amit Varma]: worse. And also there is, you know, this added element of the fact that India is getting younger.
[Amit Varma]: And this was supposed to be what people call the demographic dividend. Because you know,
[Amit Varma]: the average age in the country today is 27 60% of the country is actually born after liberalization,
[Amit Varma]: so they can't possibly relate to what we went through before that. And which is why there's
[Amit Varma]: also a sort of growing romanticization among young people of socialist ideas, and so on,
[Amit Varma]: because they haven't lived through those years. But that's an aside. But leaving that aside,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we were supposed to benefit from this demographic dividend, where these 10s of millions
[Amit Varma]: of enthusiastic entrepreneurial young people will take the country forward. But what we instead have
[Amit Varma]: is more of a demographic disaster where you have these 10s of millions of young people coming into
[Amit Varma]: the workforce as the country gets younger, but they haven't been educated well, which is a whole
[Amit Varma]: different subject. And even those who have some education are misfits and cannot get the kind of
[Amit Varma]: jobs that the skill requires or don't have the skills that the jobs require. So what are sort of
[Amit Varma]: when you try to build a long term narrative of this, what are the different kinds of strands
[Guest]: that you look at? Sure. So there, I wouldn't be that pessimistic. I think we still have a
[Guest]: demographic dividend. I'm hoping that it does not turn into a disaster. Although we seem to be going
[Guest]: that way right now. So for example, one of the things we look at is labor force participation
[Guest]: rate. So what is the percentage of the population that is actually participating in the labor force?
[Guest]: And that has seen a decline. So between 2011 and 15, we saw a 3% decline in the labor force
[Guest]: participation rate from 55% to around about 52%. But what's far more worrying is that the female
[Guest]: labor force participation rate has declined dramatically from around about 34% to 27%
[Guest]: in the last two decades. So there are far fewer women working. And this is especially true in the
[Guest]: middle income sector. So you don't see that really in poor women, and you don't see that in highly
[Guest]: educated women, but you see that in the sector in between, where women are actually dropping out the
[Guest]: labor force to stay at home. Now, one reason being given is that, you know, if you have higher income
[Guest]: and the male is able to provide for the family, then, you know, the woman doesn't see any need
[Guest]: to work. And there are also social kind of strictures or social conditions that, you know,
[Guest]: create some sort of barrier for women working. But that's a concerning figure. I mean, countries
[Guest]: like Bangladesh have higher female labor force participation rates that we do, close to 10%
[Guest]: more than us. Apart from that, what we've seen recently is that jobs in agriculture are falling.
[Guest]: We've seen 26 million jobs lost in agriculture in the same period 2011-15, while we've seen
[Guest]: non-farm jobs grow by 33 million. So that's what gives us, we were talking earlier, the 7 million
[Guest]: figure of jobs being created in those years. So that's one figure we look at the labor force
[Amit Varma]: participation rate. And just a segue for my listeners, as far as women's labor force participation
[Amit Varma]: is concerned, Namita Bhandare had an excellent series in India Spend last year. And your
[Amit Varma]: colleague Devika Kher has written about this on Pragati at thinkpragati.com, the magazine I read.
[Amit Varma]: So do check those out. And when I first realized this, this was very counterintuitive and mind
[Amit Varma]: blowing for me because I had always assumed that as India progresses, and as things get better for
[Amit Varma]: women, for example, I point to a figure like rising divorce rates as a very positive metric for the
[Amit Varma]: empowerment of women. And my assumption was that however slow it is, women are getting empowered.
[Amit Varma]: So to then find that the labor force participation has actually declined was a huge revelation for
[Amit Varma]: me, which I'm still sort of wrapping my head about. And to mention that, for the reasons you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned, and you know, you can check out the other articles, especially Namita Bhandare's
[Amit Varma]: analysis for more on that. And the interesting thing about the job loss in agriculture and is
[Amit Varma]: also that that is not necessarily a bad thing. You know, you and I have been arguing forever that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, around 50 to 60% of this country is employed in agriculture, the relative figure
[Amit Varma]: there in other countries is 5% or 6% in the US and in Europe. Part of the reason that so much of the
[Amit Varma]: countries trapped in the cycle of dependencies, again, bad government policy, and they're not able
[Amit Varma]: to escape. And we've had some episodes on this in the past, including the very last episode with
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Gunwant Patil in Hindi, please check that out. And one of the ways through which this has
[Amit Varma]: happened elsewhere across the world at that 50% becomes 5%, which is a natural process everyone
[Amit Varma]: goes through, is that productivity has gone up in those countries. And it hasn't to the same extent
[Amit Varma]: here. And I know you have some larger points to make on labor force productivity, not just in the
[Guest]: agriculture sector, but overall. So yes, labor productivity itself that we're looking at,
[Guest]: once again, we're looking at these figures, the years 2011 to 15, for which we have proper data
[Guest]: that fell to 3.84%. So during the first decade of the century from 2000 to 2010,
[Guest]: our productivity grew at an annual rate of 5.52%. Now, labor force productivity is a very important
[Guest]: figure when you're looking at GDP,
[Amit Varma]: Can you define it for me? So I don't know the term. So I'm assuming that labor force productivity is
[Amit Varma]: you sort of divide the GDP by the number of people in the labor force.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you say that, okay, each person is producing this much value.
[Guest]: Correct. You defined it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So now to obtain higher GDP growth, for example, if you have to obtain a GDP growth of 9%,
[Guest]: we need to see our labor force productivity grow at around about 7.3%. In 2015, it was 4.2%.
[Guest]: That was how much it grew by in 2015. If you want to see 10% GDP growth, we need to see our labor
[Guest]: productivity grow at around about 8.3%. So these are important figures. To look at it another way,
[Guest]: most of the workers that we have are medium skilled workers in India. 60% of workers in India
[Guest]: are medium skilled. Only 15% are high skilled. And most economies that did make that transition
[Guest]: from developing to developed, you know, moved into having higher labor force productivity.
[Guest]: Now today, for example, economies, developed economies, their labor productivity grows
[Guest]: around about 2 to 3%, but they have a much wider base. So for us to reach that percentage,
[Guest]: to us to reach that GDP growth, we need our labor productivity to grow at a commensurate rate.
[Guest]: France, if I'm not wrong, is the country with the highest labor force productivity.
[Guest]: And their labor is round about 40 times as productive as ours is.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the point, if I read you correctly, you're making is,
[Amit Varma]: is a question of the level of skilling in a highly skilled job,
[Amit Varma]: you end up producing much more of value than say you're doing a lowly skilled job, like if you're
[Amit Varma]: a worker in a factory whose only job is to put nails into something. And you have a whole bunch
[Amit Varma]: of manual laborers like that, and that productivity isn't high. So part of the secret, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: is that you have skilling going up. So, you know, more and more people do sort of more highly
[Amit Varma]: skilled jobs instead of getting stuck there. And part of the issue is that scale brings productivity.
[Amit Varma]: And as we just discussed, Indian companies aren't really allowed to scale. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: that keeps the productivity low. Even Indian agriculture, as my guest last week pointed out.
[Guest]: So one reason why you know, you see only 5% of people working in agriculture is because
[Guest]: you see those 5% are really highly skilled. You're using technologies, you're using
[Guest]: harvesters, you're using tractors, and so on and so forth. And you have fewer people working on
[Guest]: much larger tracts of land. While today in India, we have a lot of people working on smaller tracts
[Guest]: of land. So that's why agricultural productivity isn't high. Even other sectors productivity in
[Guest]: India needs to rise even in the manufacturing sector, where we've seen productivity stagnate
[Amit Varma]: by and large. Here people might naturally ask that, okay, 50% of the country approximately
[Amit Varma]: today survives on agriculture. 60 actually. Yeah. And it's a sort of a nebulous figure,
[Amit Varma]: because a lot of that is part time. And you know, it's associated. I mean, they're not directly
[Amit Varma]: farmers, but whatever, leaving aside, it's let's say it's around 50%. And it's much more than it
[Amit Varma]: should be. But if productivity in agriculture goes up, and that number comes to 5%, what happens to
[Amit Varma]: the rest of the people? Where do they get employed? How are those jobs being generated?
[Guest]: That's a really big question, because that would be even more than 20 billion that we'd require.
[Guest]: Exactly. And what we see is, we do see a lot of disguised unemployment out there where we think
[Guest]: people are employed, but they're not. And that bubbles up, you know, if it's not kind of taken
[Amit Varma]: care of, it bubbles up into social and political spheres. Give me an example of that disguised
[Amit Varma]: unemployment, like where we think they're employed, but they're not. So where, for example, an example
[Guest]: is that you think that there are five people working on a farm, and that's what's being
[Guest]: reported, but there are only two people working on the farm. And there are three guys who are just
[Guest]: sitting around doing nothing. So those three guys are disguised unemployed. We think
[Guest]: that they're employed, but they're not actually being employed. They're not actually doing any
[Guest]: work. It's just two people doing that work. And you see that coming out in social unrest in the
[Guest]: country, whether it be, you know, in these WhatsApp lynchings that happen where people get agitated,
[Guest]: whether it be in, you know, these cow lynchings that are happening. So all of these bubble up in
[Guest]: social unrest as well. And it's important to look at the fact that it's not just restricted to
[Guest]: economics. You'd see these employment issues coming out in a variety of ways if they're not
[Amit Varma]: handled or dealt with. And our mutual friend, the economist Kumar Anand, he's from Bihar, and
[Amit Varma]: he had gone to Bihar recently to spend time at Saharsa, which is his hometown, and he came back
[Amit Varma]: and we were chatting and he traveled through Bihar during that trip. And we came back and he
[Amit Varma]: was chatting and he said that one of the images which will haunt him forever, and a recurring
[Amit Varma]: image which he saw not in his nightmares, but in, you know, in real life in actual Bihar, was that
[Amit Varma]: in so many public spaces, there would just be dozens and dozens of young men, young men just
[Amit Varma]: standing doing nothing. Maybe they're standing around the pawn shop, maybe they're just standing
[Amit Varma]: on the street looking at their phones or talking to each other or, you know, smoking cigarettes,
[Amit Varma]: or they're just standing there. And this was an image I asked Nigdha Poonam about when I did an
[Amit Varma]: episode on Young India with her. Nigdha Poonam, of course, has written the excellent book Dreamers.
[Amit Varma]: And she kind of corroborated that she said that that was a familiar sight for her as well.
[Amit Varma]: And again, one of the things a book does is kind of examine what, what these young men do,
[Amit Varma]: what they sort of go through the different directions they can go in and she had a very
[Amit Varma]: powerful chapter on anger, on what they do with their anger. And a lot of these men, like for
[Amit Varma]: example, she followed a guy who was part of a Gauraksha gang, and it lifted his social status
[Amit Varma]: to be able to express his bigotry in that way, instead of keeping it suppressed. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: 20 years ago, it would have been the opposite, you'd benefit from suppressing your bigotry and
[Amit Varma]: pretending to be a reasonable person. But now, it actually pays to sort of act out on those impulses.
[Amit Varma]: And there was another person she profiled who was a warrior against Love Jihad, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And, and it's kind of worrying that when you just spoke about the social cost of all this,
[Amit Varma]: this guy's unemployment or underemployment, which I shall also ask you about, or just
[Amit Varma]: flat out unemployment that people are coming into the workforce, they are young and they don't have
[Amit Varma]: jobs and where do they go and one of the things they do is they become foot soldiers for whatever
[Amit Varma]: movement appeals to their inherent tribalism. Correct. And, you know, political parties and
[Guest]: other institutions are taking misusing, you know, a lot of these foot soldiers for their own ends.
[Guest]: And Siddhartha Poonam has talked about that. There's also this case where, you know, where
[Guest]: you have farmers whose children who are educated, or somewhat educated, then no longer want to go
[Guest]: into agriculture, but they don't find any other avenues for them. So they're, they think that
[Guest]: they've evolved beyond agriculture, they have more aspirational objectives, they want to get to
[Guest]: a government job, ideally, which they find it very difficult to get. And therefore, they're,
[Guest]: you know, part of that group of people that you've seen around standing, you know, in village squares,
[Guest]: doing nothing. And, you know, ready to do the bidding of the first person who comes along and
[Guest]: says, I'll give you 300 rupees per day, would you go out and do that? You can kind of fill in the
[Amit Varma]: blanks and what that could be. Right. So and I have a couple of questions and taking on from that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to ask you those after a brief commercial break.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another week on IBM podcast. If you are not following us on social
[Unknown]: media, please do. We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. Also, I wanted to ask
[Unknown]: everybody, you know, it would be really great if you could recommend a show that you like to a
[Unknown]: friend. That's the way that we're going to spread the word about podcasting. Please, please, please
[Unknown]: go ahead and do that. This week on Cyrus Says we have film critic Rajeev Masand. Cyrus and Rajeev
[Unknown]: discuss films they grew up on, the allure of movie stars and the bright future of Indian films.
[Unknown]: On Simplified, Chuck Narain and Sriket tell us about eco-friendly Ganeshas and how Ganpati
[Unknown]: immersions can be more environmentally friendly. On the scene in the unseen, Amit speaks to Yazad
[Unknown]: Jal, a fellow for economic policy at the Takshashila Institute about India's ongoing job
[Unknown]: crisis. On the Pragati podcast, lawyer and policy analyst Amaya Naik joins Pawan and Hamsini to
[Unknown]: discuss the Syrian civil war that's killed half a million people and displaced more than 10 million
[Unknown]: Syrians. This week on Pesa Vesa, Anupam talks to Deepak Shinoi. Deepak is the founder of Capital
[Unknown]: Mind and they discuss portfolio management schemes. The Rediscovery Project is coming out
[Unknown]: with his fourth season. Don't forget to catch Ambika and Hoshna with all new episodes from
[Unknown]: the 25th of September. And with that, let's go on with the shows. Welcome back to the scene in the
[Amit Varma]: unseen. I'm chatting with my friend Yazad Jal who's heading a project at the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution called 20 million jobs, whose idea is to make sense of the jobs crisis in India.
[Amit Varma]: And if possible, if there are solutions, he's more positive about it than I am,
[Amit Varma]: suggest solutions. So Yazad, we were discussing these millions and millions of people coming into
[Amit Varma]: the workforce on a regular basis, and there are no jobs for them. And there's a very sort of
[Amit Varma]: interesting anecdote that, like, first of all, I like I have two related observations, one of which
[Amit Varma]: leads into a question, the first observation about people not wanting to do farming anymore,
[Amit Varma]: is an observation I've made in the past, I think I had an episode with Vivek Kaur where we spoke
[Amit Varma]: about this. But and I keep talking about it that all the recent youth agitations we have had in
[Amit Varma]: the country are not over some higher causes or some great noble principles of fighting for freedom,
[Amit Varma]: or so on and so forth. But they're all about jobs. And if you notice if all you know, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: the party that's in Gujarat, or the Jats in Haryana, or the Marathas in Maharashtra, they're
[Amit Varma]: all from landowning castes. And what's kind of happened there is that with every generation,
[Amit Varma]: the amount of land that a family has basically gets split among the descendants who are usually
[Amit Varma]: more than one, and therefore the land grows smaller and smaller. And what has happened with
[Amit Varma]: this generation, especially, is that land sizes across India of these landowning castes have
[Amit Varma]: gotten so small that they're simply not sustainable. Now, we've discussed in past episodes on agriculture,
[Amit Varma]: how you're not even allowed to exit agriculture, you can't sell agricultural land for non agricultural
[Amit Varma]: purposes. So these young men, even if they wanted to can't make a living of agriculture, there isn't
[Amit Varma]: enough. And therefore they are agitating for jobs which are not being generated by industry.
[Amit Varma]: And all of these agitations are for increased reservations and government jobs. And that's a
[Amit Varma]: really scary trend that all of these recent youth agitations are about jobs, and at some level,
[Amit Varma]: arising from the failure of our agricultural policy. And my second observation at the end
[Amit Varma]: of which I have sort of a question for you, which you are uniquely placed to answer is our mutual
[Amit Varma]: friend, Mohit Satyanand had once told us about how he in Himachal, he lives part of the year in
[Amit Varma]: Himachal and he's spent a lot of time there. And he had once retired and gone there before he came
[Amit Varma]: back and now lives in Delhi. And he lives in a village called Satholi. And he's seen these kids
[Amit Varma]: grow up there over this 20 year period. And he points out that how what often happens there is
[Amit Varma]: that the children of tradesmen like plumbers and watchmen and so on and so forth, they get a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of education in the sense that they do their 10th, they maybe do their 12th also, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: in government schools or private schools or whatever. And having done that education, they
[Amit Varma]: then feel entitled to more than what their parents got. They don't want to be plumbers and they don't
[Amit Varma]: want to be sweepers and they don't want to be chowkidar. So they refuse those kind of jobs.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, they haven't learned those traits either. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: they have been enormously undereducated. So they're not really equipped to do anything else.
[Amit Varma]: And this brings me to one of the points I made at the start of the episode that there is
[Amit Varma]: an enormous that part of the jobs crisis comes from our education crisis, that there is a mismatch.
[Amit Varma]: Our education system is not turning out people who are good for anything. And it is also not
[Amit Varma]: responding to the demand from industry that, you know, give us these sort of people who do these
[Amit Varma]: sort of things. And you've also you know, in the past, you were one of the early members of
[Amit Varma]: the Center for Civil Society in Delhi in the late 1990s. And you're fairly familiar with
[Amit Varma]: education also. And would you say that's a big part of the puzzle?
[Guest]: That's definitely part of the puzzle. Agreed. Because most people that come out of even
[Guest]: engineering colleges, you know, are not, you know, qualified to do basic tasks in an engineering firm.
[Guest]: So that kind of mismatch between what our education says on paper and what skills are
[Guest]: actually learned in education is true. We need to improve that. So that's one really big part
[Guest]: of the problem. The other part of the problem is that we don't have an apprenticeship issue. So,
[Guest]: you know, there are countries which have big apprenticeship programs where, you know, kids
[Guest]: are apprenticed with, you know, somebody who's working in that area. And you spend one, two,
[Guest]: three years as an apprentice, and then you learn that skill, and then you are able to do that on
[Guest]: your own. So you are able, you then get to be much better skilled than just what an education
[Amit Varma]: would give you. And other countries also respect dignity of labor. Correct. Which is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not the case here, as in these kids that Mohit speaks about, he's seen them grow up and for them
[Amit Varma]: being a plumber or a watchman is below their dignity, they would rather do nothing at all.
[Guest]: That's right. And I mean, I'll give you a personal example. My cousin's son is a plumber in
[Guest]: Australia, and he's perfectly happy with it. It's it's something that he does, you know, out of great
[Guest]: joy, you know, doing that. It's if you were to ask if he was living in India, would he be happy
[Guest]: doing it being a plumber? Maybe not, because there isn't even that social kind of acceptance
[Amit Varma]: of certain trades. Maybe I'm just thinking aloud, and maybe caste also has something to do with it.
[Amit Varma]: Because those kind of jobs, menial jobs are done by the lower caste, and therefore that social
[Guest]: angle gets into it. That's also possible. I was also looking at another aspect of this,
[Guest]: which is vulnerability. When we're looking at jobs, we're also looking at wages. Now,
[Guest]: one stat that really hit me recently was 80% of casual workers and 30% of regular salaried workers
[Guest]: earn less than what is the minimum wage in this country, which is approximately 66 rupees on
[Guest]: average, you know, depending on where you are, minimum wage is a local subject, so different
[Guest]: areas have different minimum wages. 66 rupees for what unit? Per day. Per day. Per day, luckily.
[Guest]: And around about 78% of people in this country are vulnerable in the sense that they're either
[Guest]: self-employed or what we call unemployed, in which case they are not employed by somebody else.
[Guest]: They are responsible for, you know, raising their own salaries or their own income.
[Guest]: Prime Minister once talked about, you know, pakoda sellers being, you know, a viable job.
[Guest]: And it really isn't because what people are looking for is security and stability. And what
[Guest]: what we find instead is exactly the opposite, a large amount of vulnerability in jobs.
[Guest]: So much so that, you know, Manish Sabharwal of Team Lease has talked about
[Guest]: this not being a jobs problem in the country, but a wages problem and a vulnerability problem
[Guest]: where it's important that when we're talking about jobs, we're talking about the jobs of
[Guest]: people who are unemployed. And it's important that when we're talking about a job, we should
[Guest]: talk about something that gives a certain level of stability to the worker. And that is missing today.
[Amit Varma]: So which basically comes down to saying that, you know, you might say that on paper,
[Amit Varma]: there are X number of jobs, but if a significant percentage of them don't have a security and
[Amit Varma]: stability and B don't have high enough wages to really be meaningful in any sense of investing
[Guest]: it, they very often are not. So that level of vulnerability is something that we need to look at.
[Guest]: Another figure that I was talking about, what I was thinking of talking about when we're talking
[Guest]: about productivity earlier, is employment elasticity. So this might be a slightly wonky
[Guest]: economics term to discuss. You've already lost me. Carry on, I'm sorry. Tell us what it is.
[Guest]: One thing that we've talked about a lot of times is that if the economy grows, if GDP grows,
[Guest]: employment grows along with it. So one way to make sure that we have jobs is to simply let
[Guest]: the economy grow. But that may or may not be true. So one of the things we look at is what's called
[Guest]: the employment elasticity of income, which is a correlation of employment with GDP. Correct. So
[Guest]: this percentage of change in employment associated with a one percentage point change in GDP growth.
[Guest]: So it's the ability of an economy to generate employment opportunities for its population,
[Guest]: as the economy grows. So if your elasticity is one, it means that for every point that GDP grows,
[Guest]: you have a one percentage point growth in jobs as well, which is ideal. If it's zero,
[Guest]: it means that jobs don't grow at all. Productivity grows, but jobs don't.
[Guest]: So it simply means that the economy grows, but jobs don't grow at all. And the worst part is if
[Guest]: it's negative, which means that the economy grows, but jobs actually shrink. It means that, you know,
[Guest]: maybe you're getting more capital intensive jobs. So between 99 and 2000 to 2004 and five,
[Guest]: our employment elasticity was around about 0.5, 0.5, which meant that for every percentage that
[Guest]: the economy grew, we got 0.5% growth in jobs. So like if the economy grew 7%, you would have a 3.5%
[Guest]: growth in jobs. Correct. The next five years, from 2004, five to 2009, 10, we saw an employment
[Guest]: elasticity of 0.01, which meant basically as the economy grew, we got hardly any jobs. So virtually
[Guest]: it was close to zero. In the last, from 2009, 10 to 2011, 12, the last years we had the figures for
[Guest]: this was like 0.18. It's a worrying figure because what it tells us is that the economy will still
[Guest]: grow, but jobs don't grow along with the economy, which is one thing that we would like to see.
[Amit Varma]: And it might indicate that the economy is growing in the more highly skilled sectors rather than.
[Guest]: Correct. So part of it could be good when we're looking at say agriculture, we see that the
[Guest]: agricultural employment elasticity is negative. It's minus 0.041, which means as the economy grows,
[Guest]: agricultural sector loses jobs. What we would like to see, and some of it is heartening that
[Guest]: we would like to see a corresponding growth in other sectors. So in manufacturing, we do see
[Guest]: some amount of growth, we see an employment elasticity of 0.33. But in a sector like
[Guest]: construction, we see an employment elasticity of one. So as the economy grows, construction adds
[Guest]: the same number of jobs in a sense in its sector as the economy grows. And because farming can't
[Amit Varma]: sustain so many workers, they move to manufacturing, they move especially to construction,
[Amit Varma]: and they move into urban areas where there are more opportunities for them, which is a shift in
[Guest]: the right direction, which is a shift that we should be seeing. We should be seeing a higher
[Guest]: employment elasticity in manufacturing, because that's one sector that we see when people move
[Guest]: out of agriculture, we see people largely moving into manufacturing. In India, we've seen a lot of
[Guest]: people moving straight to services. So we see, for example, the guy who is unemployed in agriculture
[Guest]: in the rural areas comes to the urban areas and most probably works as a swiggy driver.
[Amit Varma]: Right, which is also great. I mean, now here's my next question to you. I mean, you know, this is
[Amit Varma]: clearly not something that any one party can be blamed for per se. Our whole system of governance
[Amit Varma]: is like this has been like this for 71 plus years. And I think we have broadly agreed that a lot of
[Amit Varma]: this has been caused by the draconian nature of the state. But having said all of that, what can
[Amit Varma]: the state now do to mitigate this, for example, all the recent agitations which have happened,
[Amit Varma]: Jats, Marathas, Partidas, etc, are all a demand to the state to be the solution to this and that
[Amit Varma]: in no specific cases give us reservations. But otherwise, broadly, people sort of tend to look
[Amit Varma]: at the Narendra Modi government and say that, hey, you know, okay, the previous guys might have done
[Amit Varma]: whatever, you create the jobs, can they create the jobs? To what extent can they solve this problem?
[Guest]: So let me talk about some of the government schemes that are there and see how those work out.
[Guest]: So the flagship scheme that was started out by the UPA government before and has been continued by
[Guest]: the Modi government is the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, which is called NREGA
[Guest]: or M Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. And one of the things we found
[Guest]: out is that it does improve food security. So people there, you know, who enroll under it,
[Guest]: do have a better chance of having better livelihood to some extent. However, what it has
[Guest]: also done is it has killed the development of micro enterprises in villages. So small businesses,
[Guest]: small enterprises in villages have largely been killed because of the income that it provides
[Guest]: and farmers out there. The other thing that studies have found in NREGA is that it doesn't
[Guest]: effectively target people. So only approximately 26% of those, you know, applying for jobs and
[Guest]: getting jobs in that are below the poverty line. Ideally, that figure should have been 100%. But
[Guest]: only 26% below poverty line are actually those who are getting benefit from this scheme.
[Guest]: Another scheme that the Prime Minister has talked about is being the Mudra scheme, you know, the
[Guest]: scheme that where he's looking at self-employment and trying to improve entrepreneurship. The Mudra
[Guest]: scheme gives loans to, you know, micro entrepreneurs. And there are three kinds of
[Guest]: loans given. There's Shishu loan, which is up to 50,000 rupees, the Kishore loan, which is 50,000
[Guest]: rupees to 5 lakhs, and the Tarun, which is 5 lakhs to around about 1 million, so around about 10
[Guest]: lakhs. And what we find out that out of the 32.7 million loans that have been given out,
[Guest]: rupees and loans that have been given out, the vast majority, 30.3 are Shishu loans. So these
[Guest]: are loans that are 50,000 rupees or less. And, you know, researchers said that this is not really
[Guest]: enough to create jobs. There have been reports of 55 million new jobs being created. But it's
[Guest]: highly unlikely that these loans have been given out to people who were previously unemployed.
[Guest]: So these have been given out to people who were previously employed in something else. So these
[Guest]: 55 million jobs that have been talked about in the Mudra scheme, as most probably no new net jobs
[Guest]: have been created. We've just seen a shift in jobs from one area to another.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you don't see the opportunity cost of all this, like if the money was spent elsewhere,
[Amit Varma]: it would have maybe created jobs there and that not happening has, you know, those are the unseen
[Guest]: effects. Correct. So if money was spent in, for example, in infrastructure, we might have seen a
[Guest]: much larger effect in it. There are other, you know, PM, EGP and the Pradhan Mantri Rozgar
[Guest]: Protsahan Yojana and the Gram Sadak Yojana and there are a lot of schemes that come out. But
[Guest]: my main issue with a lot of these schemes is that one assumes that the government is the one that
[Guest]: should come out with the solutions. But what we've seen is a few things that we've been talking
[Guest]: about internally about what could the ideal solutions be to these issues. The first would
[Guest]: be a focus on large enterprises, not small and micro enterprises. We need to see a scale up in
[Guest]: industry because that's where most jobs get created. So that's where we see a much greater
[Guest]: labor participation, where we see a much greater need for a labor force. And currently what's
[Guest]: happening is we are focusing on the small and micro and the unorganized sector, therefore,
[Guest]: while the challenge is to bolster our organized sector, have more jobs come in the organized
[Guest]: sector and the formal sector. And that will happen only when we see industry scaling up and we see
[Amit Varma]: larger and larger companies. And you'd say that the government should enable that by getting out
[Guest]: of the way. Correct. That's right. Other thing, of course, that the government should do is reform
[Guest]: labor laws. This is an issue perhaps for another podcast or series of podcasts on the problem that
[Guest]: we're having in labor laws. But one of the things we see, why we see that even our employment
[Guest]: necessity is low is because when companies do scale up, they'd rather invest in capital than
[Guest]: take the trouble of hiring more labor because of all the issues that we have with labor laws in
[Guest]: the country. So reforming labor laws is a big thing the government can do. And what reforming
[Amit Varma]: labor laws would also do is like your first point was about focus on large industry focus on
[Amit Varma]: getting companies in the formal sector to scale. But since most of this country's business is
[Amit Varma]: conducted in the informal sector, what reforming labor laws completely would also do is it would
[Amit Varma]: remove the disincentives for a lot of those companies to come into the formal sector.
[Amit Varma]: Correct. Because a lot of the compliance issues they face are because of these mad labor laws.
[Amit Varma]: Correct. That if you have more than 20 people, you have to do this, you have to do that,
[Amit Varma]: you have to do this. So typically, you just can't scale, you can't comply. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: if you reform them and make them sensible, like in most of the world, then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: more of the informal sector comes into the formal sector in a natural, organic way with the right
[Amit Varma]: incentives rather than sort of be coerced into it and inevitably shut down. That's right.
[Guest]: The third thing that we're looking for is to create an environment for investment in new cities,
[Guest]: because largely what we're seeing is we're seeing greater employment in urban areas compared to
[Guest]: rural areas. We want to see that as well, because we want to see people moving out of agriculture
[Guest]: and the rural areas into more urban areas. And one way of that happening is infrastructure
[Guest]: development, the establishment of new cities. The prime minister had once talked about creating
[Guest]: 100 new cities. I think we most probably had one most probably coming up Amravati in the new state
[Guest]: in Andhra Pradesh. So, but is it the government job to create new cities? I don't think it's the
[Guest]: government job to create new cities. It's the government's job to create incentives, right,
[Guest]: or basically stay out of the way so that new urban centers can come up. Right. And it's these
[Guest]: new urban centers that will create more jobs, which will create better infrastructure, just
[Guest]: building new cities itself will create more jobs on a temporary basis. But beyond that, we have
[Guest]: a lot of potential in areas of health care, in areas of education, things that we need to improve
[Guest]: for our own country, and areas that, you know, for higher education that we can build for the rest of
[Guest]: the world as well. So these are areas that are potential solutions for us, where we can absorb
[Guest]: the 20 million that each year that is going to come out for the next few years for us. So we need
[Guest]: to have a plan that can absorb that many new entrants to the labor force every year. So it's
[Guest]: not that we have 20 million jobs as one final figure. It's 20 million jobs every year that need
[Amit Varma]: to be created. And even not just the 20 million jobs created for the new entrance into the workforce,
[Amit Varma]: but also taking into account that there's a lot of this guy's unemployment, that a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: are underemployed, that they don't have, for example, that there's that there's so much labor
[Amit Varma]: vulnerability where you're selling pakoras and that's not really a real job. It's not even you
[Amit Varma]: can't even call that guy an entrepreneur because he's not building a business. He's just surviving
[Amit Varma]: on a day to day basis. And you know, tell me if you agree, but I think the fundamental problem of
[Amit Varma]: why we are in this mess is a mindset problem we've had for 71 years. And that's a mindset problem
[Amit Varma]: of command and control, that an economy can be planned from above. And that essentially,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's that whole thing about the citizens of a country being subjects to the rulers and the
[Amit Varma]: rulers will set the rules and decide what happens and give the requisite permissions for everything
[Amit Varma]: and keep every everyone on tight leash. And what that has done is that that that didn't allow a
[Amit Varma]: manufacturing revolution to happen in India when it should have because our greatest strength was
[Amit Varma]: our labor force in China stole the marsh there. And despite the limited liberalization of 91,
[Amit Varma]: and I always use the word limited with it because it really it was it was very limited
[Amit Varma]: and not a true liberalization and despite that that mindset still
[Amit Varma]: persists whether it was in the previous UPA government or whether it is with
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi that okay, government will do this, we'll build all these cities, we'll do this,
[Amit Varma]: we'll skill people will and that's completely the wrong mindset, the right mindset, which these
[Amit Varma]: people don't have, because they don't understand spontaneous orders and how economies and cities
[Amit Varma]: work in a positive some way is that you just allow the entrepreneurial energy of people to express
[Amit Varma]: itself, allow it fully. And when that happens, all this will take care of itself, growth will happen,
[Amit Varma]: jobs will come. And I think most people don't understand except people who run businesses
[Amit Varma]: themselves, the extent to which we are still tied up in chains.
[Guest]: True. That's quite true. So it's not the question of just creating lakhs and lakhs of entrepreneurs
[Guest]: either. It's, you know, it's just perhaps creating a few 1000 entrepreneurs, who would then be able
[Guest]: to employ hundreds of 1000s of people themselves, right. So when we talk because there's a lot of
[Guest]: talk about, you know, how entrepreneurship would be the next revolution. And one must be careful
[Guest]: that you know, when you're talking about entrepreneurship, we're not talking about
[Guest]: the pakodawala as an entrepreneur, right? We are talking about an entrepreneur who actually employs
[Guest]: a few 1000 people, at least himself or herself. Right. So, you know, I know that 20 million jobs
[Amit Varma]: project that you are on is still sort of at an early stage is still kind of gathering all of
[Amit Varma]: the data and you don't want to commit to sort of talking about solutions this early and at
[Amit Varma]: a later point when you're ready, we'll do a separate episode on that once you have better,
[Amit Varma]: more clarity on what specific policy measures and so on you'd like to suggest. But just looking at
[Amit Varma]: sort of the scenario of jobs in India, and it really looks bleak to me because you have all
[Amit Varma]: these young men coming out into the workforce, no jobs, all the relevant social problems that
[Amit Varma]: we discussed and it looks bleak to me, I know you're more hopeful about it. So my question to
[Amit Varma]: you is, what makes you despair? And what makes you hopeful about the medium term, let's say the next
[Guest]: 10 years of India, keeping our youth in mind. So what makes me hopeful is that we do have,
[Guest]: you know, youth that are coming out and that are taking, you know, a lot of things and taking their
[Guest]: own future in their own hands. In a sense, we talked about Snigdha Poonam's book in Dreamers,
[Guest]: when you talk about the first few chapters of the book where you have the guy who's teaching,
[Guest]: taking English classes, or the one who's setting up a clickbait factory. So these are young people
[Guest]: who are taking their future into their own hands. And we are seeing a certain level of
[Guest]: mental freedom in a sense, that they are able to do what they wanted to do.
[Guest]: And, you know, they're taking charge of India in some sense. So that makes me hopeful.
[Guest]: What makes me despair is that we don't have enough of them. And we're not creating the conditions
[Guest]: that would encourage more such people to come up. That we're actually, you know, still stuck,
[Guest]: you know, we may no longer have a planning commission, we may have something called
[Guest]: Niti Aayog. But perhaps we're still stuck in that same mindset, where we expected something
[Guest]: to be planned for us. Which is why, you know, so many people run after jobs in the railways
[Guest]: or in the government police. While we should be really looking at both entrepreneurs as well as
[Guest]: well as, as well as the private sector to be able to help us create the number of jobs that we need.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in the minds of some people, private sector is like it's a sullied term. But the thing
[Amit Varma]: is, what is private sector? What are entrepreneurs? It's society. You know, there's no public sector
[Amit Varma]: and private sector and public sector is noble and good and private sector is greedy capitalists. No,
[Amit Varma]: private sector is society. Markets are how society interacts with itself and how people
[Amit Varma]: take care of each other. And on that final positive note of hope that I know we both
[Amit Varma]: agree on. Thank you so much for coming on. Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode of the scene in the unseen do head on over to Twitter
[Amit Varma]: and follow at 20m jobs at 20m jobs is a Twitter handle of 20 million jobs. The project that
[Amit Varma]: Yazad Jal and colleagues of his run at the Takshashila institution, you can follow Yazad
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter at Yazad Jal. You can follow me at Amit Verma and you can browse past episodes of
[Unknown]: the scene in the unseen at seen unseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Unknown]: How about you change things a little. Even a small effort can make a big difference.
[Unknown]: And I'll tell you how and what exactly. Hi guys, I'm coach Urmi and on the kinetic living podcast,
[Unknown]: you can look forward to some interesting stories of people who have changed the way they look at
[Unknown]: fitness after their kinetic journeys. episodes out every Wednesday on the IBM app website and
[Unknown]: anywhere you get your podcast from. Transcribed by https://otter.ai